LETTERS
Social evaluation by preverbal infants
J. Kiley Hamlin1, Karen Wynn1 & Paul Bloom1
The capacity to evaluate other people is essential for navigating the
social world. Humans must be able to assess the actions and inten-
tions of the people around them, and make accurate decisions
about who is friend and who is foe, who is an appropriate social
partner and who is not. Indeed, all social animals benefit from the
capacity to identify individual conspecifics that may help them,
and to distinguish these individuals from others that may harm
them. Human adults evaluate people rapidly and automatically on
the basis of both behaviour and physical features1–6, but the onto-
genetic origins and development of this capacity are not well
understood. Here we show that 6- and 10-month-old infants take
into account an individual’s actions towards others in evaluating
that individual as appealing or aversive: infants prefer an indi-
vidual who helps another to one who hinders another, prefer a
helping individual to a neutral individual, and prefer a neutral
individual to a hindering individual. These findings constitute
evidence that preverbal infants assess individuals on the basis of
their behaviour towards others. This capacity may serve as the
foundation for moral thought and action, and its early develop-
mental emergence supports the view that social evaluation is a
biological adaptation.
Our experiments used two methodologies to assess 6- and 10-
month-old infants’ intuitions about social interactions: a choice
paradigm7–11 in which infants indicate preferences through their
reaching behaviour, and a violation of expectation paradigm12–16 that
assesses infants’ expectations via their looking times, capitalizing on
the phenomenon that infants tend to look longer at unexpected or
surprising events.
In experiment 1, infants saw a character (the ‘climber’, made of
wood and with large eyes glued onto it) initially at rest at the bottom
of a hill. During a habituation phase, infants saw events in which the
climber repeatedly attempted to climb the hill, and on the third
attempt was either aided up by a helper who pushed it from behind,
or was pushed downby a hinderer (Fig. 1a; stimulus clips and Supple-
mentary Methods are available at http://www.yale.edu/infantlab/
socialevaluation and in the Supplementary Information). Infants
saw alternating helping and hindering trials with looking time mea-
sured on each trial, until their looking time reached a pre-set criterion
indicating they had sufficiently processed these events. Previous
studies from our laboratory found that infants interpret similar,
computer-animated events as instances of helping and hindering,
and expect the climber subsequently to approach the helper and
avoid the hinderer15,16. We asked here how infants themselves, as
uninvolved and unaffected bystanders, evaluate helpers and hin-
derers. Will witnessing one individual’s actions towards an unknown
third party affect infants’ attitude towards that individual?
In the test phase, our choice measure examined infants’ attitudes
towards the helper and hinderer. Infants were encouraged to choose
between the two (that is, reach for one). Infants robustly chose the
helper (14 of 16 10-month-olds, binomial probability test, one-tailed
P5 0.002; 12 of 12 6-month-olds, P5 0.0002), indicating that they
held distinct impressions of the two characters on the basis of their
actions towards the climber (see Fig 2).
Our looking time measure replicated our previous studies asses-
sing 9- and 12-month-olds’ expectations about the climber’s atti-
tudes to the helper and hinderer15,16, and extended this question to
younger infants. Infants saw a new display containing climber, helper
and hinderer (Fig. 1b). The climber alternately approached the helper
(unsurprising) and the hinderer (a surprising action). Replicating
our previous results, 10-month-olds looked longer at the latter event
(meanhinderer5 4.96 s, meanhelper5 3.82 s; paired t-test, t(15)5
2.603, two-tailed P5 0.02), indicating surprise when the climber
approached one who had previously hindered it. Six-month-olds,
however, looked equally to both events (meanhinderer5 5.7 s, mean-
helper5 6.7 s; t(11)5 0.80, P5 0.44), suggesting that they did not
attribute to the climber distinct attitudes towards the two characters,
despite themselves preferring helper to hinderer in our choice mea-
sure. This suggests that the capacity for social evaluationmay develop
before the ability to infer others’ evaluations.
Our claim—that young infants evaluate others based on their
social behaviour—entails that infants were responding to social,
not superficial perceptual, aspects of our events. If infants of these
ages prefer, for example, upward to downward motion, or pushing
up to pushing down actions, then our subjects may have chosen the
helper for these non-social reasons. To assess this, we conducted a
second experiment in which infants saw events like those of experi-
ment 1 except that the pushed object did not appear animate and
goal-driven like our climber, but inanimate (Fig. 1c)—an entity to
which social notions of helping and hindering do not apply.
In experiment 2, new groups of infants saw two characters (the
helper and hinderer from experiment 1), on alternating trials,
smoothly push up or down the hill, respectively, an inanimate object
(the climber of experiment 1 but with eyes removed, and undergoing
no self-propelled motion). Although the two characters’ physical
trajectories and respective effects on the pushed object were similar
to those of the helper and hinderer in experiment 1, these events are
not social interactions and cannot be viewed as instances of ‘helping’
and ‘hindering’. Infants were then given a choice measure only.
If perceptual preferences, not social evaluations, drove infants’
choices in experiment 1, similar preferences should be obtained here:
infants should robustly prefer the pusher-up to the pusher-down
character. However, neither age group did so. Six of twelve 10-
month-olds chose the pusher-up, binomial probability test, one-
tailed P5 0.613; four of twelve 6-month-olds did so, P5 0.927.
These responses differed significantly from those in experiment 1
(10-month-olds, P5 0.04, Fisher’s exact test; 6-month-olds,
P5 0.001), in which infants overwhelmingly chose the pusher-up
(helper) when this action was embedded in a social context, indi-
cating that infants’ preferences in experiment 1 were based on social,
not perceptual, differences between helping and hindering events.
Infants’ choice patterns indicate three possibilities: infants may
positively evaluate an individual seen helping another (thus find
the helper appealing); they may negatively evaluate an individual
1Yale University, Department of Psychology, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8205, USA.
Vol 450 |22 November 2007 |doi:10.1038/nature06288
557
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
seen hindering another (thus find the hinderer aversive); or both
positive and negative evaluation processes may be operative. We
accordingly conducted a third experiment in which new groups of
6- and 10-month-old infants chose between a neutral character and
a valenced character—either a helper (for infants in the helping/
neutral condition) or a hinderer (the hindering/neutral condition).
In experiment 3 habituation trials, each infant saw either a helper
or a hinderer acting on a climber as in experiment 1, and a neutral
character which moved uphill or downhill in the same manner as the
valenced character but did not interact with the climber (Fig. 1d).
Infants in both conditions were then given a choice measure to assess
their own preference for the neutral versus valenced character, and a
looking time measure to assess their expectations of the climber’s
preference for the neutral versus valenced character.
In the choicemeasure, infants of both ages responded differently to
the neutral character when it was paired with the helper than when it
was paired with the hinderer (Fisher’s exact test, two-tailed P5 0.01
for each age group). Infants in the helping/neutral condition system-
atically chose the helper (seven of eight 10-month-olds, binomial
probability test, one-tailed P5 0.035; and seven of eight 6-month-
olds, P5 0.035), whereas infants in the hindering/neutral group
chose the neutral character (seven of eight 10-month-olds, P5
0.035; and seven of eight 6-month-olds, P5 0.035). That is, infants
were both drawn towards helpers and independently inclined to
avoid hinderers, revealing both positive and negative evaluations.
Infants’ choices were not based on general perceptual preferences:
within each condition, the neutral and valenced characters enacted
identical motion patterns; a preference for solitary action over
interaction (or vice versa) would have generated across-the-board
choice (or avoidance) of the neutral character in both conditions, not
choice in one and avoidance in the other, as was observed. Infants’
preference for the helper and aversion to the hinderer, then, are best
explained as specifically social evaluations: a liking for those who act
cooperatively to facilitate the goals of others, and a dislike of those
who impede another’s goals.
In our looking time measure, infants of both ages failed to dis-
criminate the test events (climber approaching the neutral versus
the valenced character (helper or hinderer), two-tailed t-tests, all
P-values .0.3). Together with the looking time results from experi-
ment 1 this suggests that 10-month-olds, although having expecta-
tions of how an individual will respond to two actors performing
opposing actions, do not anticipate how an individual will respond to
actors performing less-distinct actions.
Previous research has established that infants in the first half-year of
life exhibit preferences for social individuals based on static perceptual
features (for example, facial attractiveness, race)17,18, and toddlers by
18 months of age spontaneously engage in cooperative helping beha-
viour19. The findings reported here constitute the first evidence that
young infants’ social preferences are influenced by others’ behaviour
towards unrelated third parties. The presence of social evaluation so
early in infancy suggests that assessing individuals by the nature of
their interactions with others is central to processing the social world,
both evolutionarily and developmentally. The capacity for such eva-
luations can be seen as a biological adaptation: cooperative behaviour
such as group hunting, food sharing and warfare can be beneficial to
individual members of a group, but can only successfully evolve if
individuals can distinguish free riders from cooperators or ‘recipro-
cators’, those willing to do their fair share20,21. Our findings suggest
that preverbal infants may be sensitive to this distinction.
The capacity to evaluate individuals by their social actions may also
serve as a foundation for a developing system of moral cognition.
Plainly, many aspects of a full-fledged moral system are beyond the
a
b
c
d
Figure 1 | Social interaction events shown to
infants. a, Helping and hindering habituation
events of experiments 1 and 3. On each trial, the
climber (red circle) attempts to climb the hill
twice, each time falling back to the bottom of the
hill. On the third attempt, the climber is either
bumped up the hill by the helper (left panel) or
bumped down the hill by the hinderer (right
panel). Infants in experiment 1 saw these two
events in alternating sequence; infants in
experiment 3 saw either a helping or hindering
event in alternation with the corresponding
neutral event depicted in d. b, Looking time test
events of experiments 1 and 3. The climbermoves
from the top of the hill to sit with the character on
the right (left panel) or the left (right panel).
c, Pushing-up and pushing-down habituation
events of experiment 2. An inanimate object (red
circle) rests (left panel) at the bottom of the hill
and is pushed up, or rests (right panel) at the top
of the hill and is pushed down. Infants saw these
two events in alternation. d, Neutral habituation
events from helper/neutral (left panel) and
hinderer/neutral (right panel) conditions of
experiment 3. The neutral character, without
interacting with the climber, traces a path
identical to that of the helper (left panel) or
hinderer (right panel). Each infant saw either the
helping or hindering event depicted in a, in
alternation with the corresponding neutral event.
LETTERS NATURE |Vol 450 |22 November 2007
558
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
grasp of the preverbal infant. Yet the ability to judge differentially those
who perform positive and negative social acts may form an essential
basis for any system thatwill eventually containmore abstract concepts
of right and wrong. The social evaluations we have observed in our
young subjects have (at least) one crucial component of genuinemoral
judgements: they do not stem from infants’ own experiences with the
actors involved. Our subjects had no previous history with our char-
acters, nor did they themselves experience any consequences of these
characters’ actions. Their evaluations were made on the basis of wit-
nessed interactions between unknown individuals: the infant, as an
unaffected, unrelated (and therefore unbiased) third party, is none-
theless rendering a judgement about the value of a social act.
Our findings indicate that humans engage in social evaluation far
earlier in development than previously thought, and support the view
that the capacity to evaluate individuals on the basis of their social
interactions is universal and unlearned22–24. Determining the com-
plexity of this understanding—for instance, do infants prefer to
interact with agents who punish hinderers over those who reward
them—will require further research.
METHODS SUMMARY
Subjects were healthy full-term infants recruited from the greater New Haven
area and tested in K.W.’s Infant Cognition Laboratory at Yale University. Ten-
month-olds ranged from 9 months 12 days to 10months 16 days; 6-month-olds
from 5months 3 days to 6months 17 days.
Habituation events occurred in a display (122 cm wide, 66 cm high) contain-
ing a green incline with 43-cm elevation from base to top. Characters were blocks
(9 cm 3 9 cm 3 1 cm) with large (2.5-cm diameter) ‘googly eyes’ (with the
exception of the eyeless object in experiment 2). The looking time test display
(122 cm 3 66 cm) contained a hill with 14-cm elevation from base to top.
Infants sat in parents’ laps; parents were instructed not to interfere with
infants. Parents of all infants in experiment 2 and 6-month-olds in experiment
3 were additionally instructed to close their eyes during choice measure. Infants
received habituation trials until (1) looking time on three consecutive trials (after
the first three) decreased to half that on the first three trials or (2) 14 trials were
presented. End-of-trial for habituation and looking time test trials occurred
when (1) the infant looked away continuously for 2 s or (2) 60 s had elapsed.
A coder blind to the identities of the characters monitored infants’ looking times
and administered the choice measure. A second coder independently coded a
random 25% of subjects of each age group in each experiment; coders achieved
98% positive agreement on both measures.
The following were counterbalanced across subjects in each experiment and
age group: identities of helper/hinderer (experiment 1), pusher-up/pusher-
down (experiment 2) and valenced/neutral characters (experiment 3); order of
habituation events; order of choice and looking time measures (experiments 1
and 3); positions (left/right) of characters in choice and in looking time trials;
order of climber’s approach in looking time test trials to helper/hinderer (experi-
ment 1) and valenced/neutral character (experiment 3).
Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of
the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Received 3 August; accepted 24 September 2007.
1. Langlois, J. H. Physical Appearance, Stigma, and Social Behavior: The Ontario
Symposium Vol. 3 (eds Herman, C. P., Zanna, M. P. & Higgins, E. T.) (Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1986).
2. Shepherd, J. Perceiving and Remembering Faces (eds Davies, G., Ellis, H. &
Shepherd, J.) (Academic Press, San Diego, California, 1981).
3. Winter, L. & Uleman, J. When are social judgments made? Evidence for the
spontaneousness of trait inferences. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 47, 237–252 (1984).
4. Ambady, N. & Rosenthal, R. Thin slices of expressive behavior as predictors of
interpersonal consequences: A meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 111, 256–274 (1992).
5. Cunningham,W. A. et al. Separable neural components in the processing of black
and white faces. Psychol. Sci. 15, 806–813 (2004).
6. Todorov, A., Mandisodza, A., Goren, A. & Hall, C. Inferences of competence from
faces predict election outcomes. Science 308, 1623–1626 (2005).
7. Piaget, J. The Construction of Reality in the Child (Routledge, New York, 1954).
8. Repacholi, B.M. &Gopnik, A. Early reasoning about desires: Evidence from 14–18-
month olds. Dev. Psychol. 33, 12–21 (1997).
9. Feigenson, L., Carey, S. & Spelke, E. S. Infants’ discrimination of number vs
continuous extent. Cognit. Psychol. 44, 33–66 (2002).
10. Hamlin, J. K., Hallinan, E. V. & Woodward, A. L. Do as I do: 7-month-old infants
selectively reproduce others’ goals. Dev. Sci.. (in the press).
11. Cheries, E., Mitroff, S. R., Wynn, K. & Scholl, B. J. Cohesion as a principle of object
persistence in infancy. Dev. Sci.. (in the press).
12. Woodward, A. L. Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor’s reach.
Cognition 69, 1–34 (1998).
13. Premack, D. & Premack, A. J. Infants attribute value6 to the goal-directed actions
of self-propelled objects. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9, 848–856 (1997).
14. Gergely, G., Nadasdy, Z., Csibra, G. & Biro, S. Taking the intentional stance at 12
months of age. Cognition 56, 165–193 (1995).
15. Kuhlmeier, V., Wynn, K. & Bloom, P. Attribution of dispositional states by 12-
month-olds. Psychol. Sci. 14, 402–408 (2003).
16. Kuhlmeier, V., Wynn, K. & Bloom, P. Reasoning about present dispositions based
on past interactions (International Conference on Infant Studies, Chicago, Illinois,
5 May 2004).
17. Kelley, D. et al. 3-month-olds, but not newborns, prefer own-race faces.Dev. Sci.8,
F31–F36 (2005).
18. Slater, A. et al. Newborn infants prefer attractive faces. Infant Behav. Dev. 21,
345–354 (1998).
19. Warneken, F. & Tomasello, M. Altruistic helping in human infants and young
chimpanzees. Science 311, 1301–1303 (2006).
20. Trivers, R. L. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q. Rev. Biol. 46, 35–57 (1971).
21. Axelrod, R. The Evolution of Cooperation (Basic Books, New York, 1984).
22. Haidt, J. & Joseph, C. Intuitive ethics: How innately prepared intuitions generate
culturally variable virtues. Daedalus 133, 55–66 (2004).
23. Pinker, S. The Blank Slate (Norton, New York, 2002).
24. Hauser, M. Moral Minds (Ecco, New York, 2006).
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We thank A. Norman, J. Stitelman, E. Madva, K. McCrink,
G. Newman and E. Cheries for their assistance and input. This work was supported
in part by a National Science Foundation grant to K.W.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
www.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to J.K.H. (kiley.hamlin@yale.edu) and to K.W. (karen.wynn@yale.edu).
100
75
50
NS
NS
10-month-olds
Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
of
 in
fa
nt
s 
ch
oo
si
ng
 e
ac
h 
in
d
iv
id
ua
l
6-month-olds
Helper Hinderer Non-valenced (inanimate 
and neutral conditions)
****
** * *
** * *
****
25
0
100
75
50
25
0
Pu
sh
ed
 c
lim
be
r
up
hi
ll
Pu
sh
ed
 c
lim
be
r
do
w
nh
ill
Pu
sh
ed
 b
al
l
up
hi
ll
Pu
sh
ed
 b
al
l
do
w
nh
ill
Pu
sh
ed
 c
lim
be
r
up
hi
ll
N
eu
tra
l m
ov
ed
up
hi
ll
Pu
sh
ed
 c
lim
be
r
do
w
nh
ill
N
eu
tra
l m
ov
ed
do
w
nh
ill
Figure 2 | Choice results. Percentage of infants choosing each character
across experiments 1, 2 and 3. NS, not significant. Asterisk, one-tailed
P, 0.05; double asterisk, P, 0.05.
NATURE |Vol 450 |22 November 2007 LETTERS
559
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
METHODS
Experiment 1: helper versus hinderer. Subjects were 16 10-month-olds (8 girls;
mean age 9months, 26 days; range 9months, 14 days to 10months, 16 days) and
12 6-month-olds (5 girls; mean age 6months, 5 days; range 5months, 18 days to
6months, 17 days). Four additional infants (two 10-month-olds) were excluded
owing to parental interference (two) or procedure error (two). Subjects in all
experiments were healthy full-term infants.
Infants sat in parents’ laps before a table with a curtain at the far end (165 cm
from the infant), which could be lowered to occlude a display stage (122 cmwide,
66 cm high) with a white background and a green ‘hill’ or incline protruding
10 cm, which rose from lower right to upper left corner of the display (43 cm
from lowest to highest point). It had a small ‘plateau’ one-third of theway up and
a second at the top. Characters were wooden blocks 9 cm 3 9 cm with ‘googly
eyes’. For 10-month-olds, the climber was a yellow triangle; helper and hinderer
were a red square and a blue circle (counterbalanced). For 6-month-olds, the
climber was a blue circle; helper and hinderer were a yellow triangle and a red
square.
The curtain was first raised and lowered three times with the climber at the
base of the incline. Habituation trials then began. The climber climbed to the
lower plateau, ‘danced’ (jiggled up and down) for 2 s, then attempted twice to
reach the upper plateau, each time falling back to the lower plateau. On a third
attempt, the climber was either pushed to the top by the helper, or pushed to the
bottomby the hinderer. In helping events, the helper entered the display from the
lower right, moved up the incline and bumped the climber twice, each time
pushing him farther up until the climber reached the upper plateau. The climber
subsequently ‘danced’ while the helper went downhill and exited; the climber
then became stationary. In hindering events, the hinderer entered from the upper
left, moved down the incline and bumped the climber twice, each time pushing
him farther down. The climber then tumbled end-over-end to hill bottom and
remained stationary, while the hinderer moved back up the hill and exited. Total
event duration was 11 s.
A coder blind to the identities of helper and hinderer recorded infants’ looking
to the stationary climber. Infants’ looking was measured from helper/hinderer’s
exit until end-of-trial, reached when (1) the infant looked away continuously for
2 s, or (2) 60 s elapsed. The curtain dropped to occlude the display between trials.
Infants saw helping and hindering trials in alternating sequence until (1) the
summed looking times on three consecutive trials after the first three dropped to
less than half the summed looking on the first 3 trials, or (2) 14 trials had elapsed.
Both age groups habituated in an average of 9 trials.
Infants were then given choice and looking time test measures. Choice: the
coder presented the infant with the helper and the hinderer 25 cm apart on a
white board, and asked ‘‘would you like to pick a toy?’’ Infants’ choice was
defined as the character touched first, as judged by the (blind) coder, with the
constraint that the infant had to be looking at the toy during or immediately
preceding the touch (to exclude possibly accidental touches during board
exploration, and so on). All infants in experiment 1 made identifiable choices.
Looking time: the test display contained a shallow symmetrical test hill (122 cm
3 66 cm, rising 14 cm from lowest to highest point). The climber sat at the top
centre of the hill, with the helper and hinderer resting at the bottom left and right
of the hill. The climbermoved back and forth (10 cm each way) along the crest of
the hill twice, then danced (2 s) at the top centre. Test trials then commenced.
The climber partially approached, retreated, then fully approached to rest next to
the helper or hinderer (on alternating trials); infants’ looks to the now-stationary
characters were then recorded.
A second coder independently coded a random 25% of subjects, achieving
99% agreementwith the first coder on looking time and 100%on choice for both
age groups.
The following were counterbalanced across subjects in each age group: (1)
colour/shape of helper and hinderer; (2) order of helping and hindering habitu-
ation events; (3) order of choice and looking time measures; (4) positions of
helper and hinderer in choice and in looking time trials; and (5) order of
‘approach-helper’ and ‘approach-hinderer’ looking time trials.
Experiment 2: pushing inanimate object uphill versus downhill. Subjects were
12 10-month-olds (eight girls; mean age 10months, 2 days; range 9months,
14 days to 10months, 22 days) and 12 6-month-olds (6 girls; mean age 6months,
1 day; range 5months, 15 days to 6months, 17 days). Two additional 6-month-
olds were excluded from the final sample owing to procedure error (1) and
fussiness (1).
Stimuli were as in experiment 1 except that to create the ‘object’ stimulus, the
eyes of the climber stimulus from experiment 1 were removed so that it appeared
inanimate. Helper and hinderer stimuli from experiment 1 were used as pusher-
up and pusher-down stimulus characters. Events were as in experiment 1 except
that the object, unlike the climber in experiment 1, underwent no self-generated
motion, and the pusher-up and pusher-down smoothly pushed the object all the
way up (down) the incline from its starting location at bottom (top). Event
duration was 11 s. In addition to being instructed not to interfere with their
infants, parents were instructed to keep their eyes closed during the choice
measure.
A second coder independently coded a random 25% of subjects of each age
group; the two coders reached 100% agreement on choice, for both the 6- and
10-month-olds.
The following were counterbalanced across infants within each age group: (1)
colour/shape of pusher-up and pusher-down; (2) order of habituation events;
and (3) position of pusher-up and pusher-down in choice.
Experiment 3: valenced (helper/hinderer) versus neutral character. Subjects
were 16 10-month-olds (eight girls; mean age 9months, 27 days; range 9months,
12 days to 10months, 14 days) and 16 6-month-olds (eight girls; mean age
5months, 28 days; range 5months, 3 days to 6months, 16 days). Eight additional
infants (one 10-month-old) were excluded from the final sample owing to a
procedure error (three), fussiness (two) and failure to make an identifiable
choice (three). Half the subjects in each age group saw helping and neutral
events, half saw hindering and neutral events.
For 10-month-olds, the climber was a blue circle; valenced and neutral char-
acters were a red square and a yellow triangle. For 6-month-olds, the climber was
a red circle; valenced and neutral characters were a yellow triangle and a blue
square.
During habituation, half the infants (randomly chosen) in each age group saw
helping and neutral events on alternate trials, half saw hindering and neutral
events. Helping and hindering events were as in experiment 1. During neutral
trials in the helping/neutral condition, the climber ‘danced’ for 2 s at the bottom
of the incline (lower right), then sat motionless. The neutral character then
entered from the lower right, bypassed the climber, and traced the same path
as the helper, performing the samemotions but not interacting with the climber.
During neutral trials in the hindering/neutral condition, the climber ‘danced’ for
2 s at the lower right then satmotionless. The neutral character then entered from
the upper left and traced the same path as the hinderer, performing the same
motions without interacting with the climber.
Infants then received choice and looking time measures. In the choice mea-
sure, infants were presentedwith the valenced (helping or hindering) and neutral
characters. In the looking time measure, the climber approached valenced and
neutral characters on alternating trials.
A second coder independently coded a random 25% of subjects of each age
group; the two coders reached 98% agreement on looking time and 100% agree-
ment on choice, for both the 6- and 10-month-olds.
The following were counterbalanced across infants within each age group and
condition: (1) colour/shape of valenced and neutral characters; (2) order of
habituation events; (3) order of choice and looking time measures; (4) position
of neutral character in choice and in looking time trials; and (5) order of
‘approach-valenced’ and ‘approach-neutral’ looking time trials.
doi:10.1038/nature06288
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
